Let's talk about the balance sheet and so the balance sheet has assets at the top and assets must equal
liabilities plus equity.
And so let's get rid of these guys here.
All right.
So underneath assets we have current assets in long term assets and current assets are sorted by stuff
we can convert to cash first and stuff that takes us longer to convert to cash so cash can obviously
be converted to itself right away and then comes short term investments which could be Treasury bills
and then accounts receivable meaning money that's owed to us by customers so instead of a customer paying
us cash for something we basically told hey don't worry about it you can pay me in 27 or 28 days from
now.
And so we're actually at a cash deficit because of that.
Don't worry.
That doesn't make sense.
We'll cover that in the cash flow section next section.
And then we have inventories here and so current assets are stuffed with it to cash in less than one
year.
Long term assets is stuff that will most likely take us longer than one year to convert into cash.
And so we already talked about depreciation.
But what we do on the balance sheet is we list what our asset is valued at today meaning after we subtracted
all of the depreciation from prior years.
Okay.
So that's assets.
And so total assets is basically current assets plus long term US.
Let's move on to liquidity and equity and we group these together because assets always has equal liabilities
plus equity.
So in the liability section we have accounts payable which basically means money we owe to other people
today.
And I always encourage companies to pay their bills as late as possible without incurring a penalty
.
And the reason is that you need to think of yourself as a bank because if you pay your bills as late
as you can without incurring interest expenses or penalties then you get to collect that little bit
of interest on that cash until you pay it back in.
I know interest rates are low today so it doesn't seem to matter but it does matter when interest rates
are 12 percent or so are much higher because if you think about it if you paid all of your debts right
one or two days before they were do instead of read again the month.
So if you paid them at the end of month then what that would mean is you would save 1 percent every
month times 12 months as 12 percent that's a big deal.
It's a big deal.
And we have short term debt and these items here are due in less than one year and then similar to long
term assets when it comes to long term liabilities long term debt is stuff or debt that's due in greater
than one year and so total liabilities of course equals current liabilities plus long term liabilities
.
Let's move on equity to K equity is composed of a couple of items retained earnings which basically
this is actually the link between the income statement and the balance sheet.
They talk to each other because you have earnings and you retainer and it's right you don't pay them
out right.
You can pay out dividends if you want.
Let's assume we're not.
If we don't pay out our earnings and we just keep it for ourselves in our company then we retain those
earnings and retained earnings is simply what was net income last quarter that sort of thing.
Okay.
And I'll explain that more detail in a second.
And this is the issuing of common shares or stock.
Right.
And so of course assets has to equal liabilities plus equity.
Now what we're going to do is we're going to analyze similar to what we did with the income stream exercise
a couple of years 2014 2015.
Then look at the dollar change year over year.
Remember faience is all about looking at the rate of change and looking for patterns and then look at
the percent change year over year and then we'll flag these items the percent changes.
Are those concerns or not and if there is a concern that will explain why.
Okay let's take a look at our numbers here.
As you can see liabilities in equity here equals assets here.
Same can be said for 2015 assets here is equal to liabilities plus equity.
And I've got this really cool formula set up for you and I'm including this file in this current lecture
and you can actually use this see that it basically says if this doesn't equal that then say hey balance
sheet doesn't balance otherwise do the opposite.
And I'll show you how that formula works so if I just delete a bunch of stuff here she there it says
no.
The balance sheet doesn't balance read salts.
Control-C to do that and the same token here if I do that stuff.
No the balance sheet doesn't balance.
And that's our little check.
That's what's called a belt.
Right.
Assets has to balance with liability in equities.
OK let's look at the dollar change over year.
And I also want to look at the percent change year over year.
And so our cash balance goes up $200000.
You might ask yourself we asked second Chris doesn't that just mean our net income was $200000 for the
year.
The answer is absolutely not right.
Because cash and net income are different things.
Right because maybe there's non-cash expenses like depreciation and other stuff like that.
Don't worry if that sounds complicated by the end of the cashflow section which is next section there
will be an aha moment and all of this will make perfect sense.
OK so let's look at trends.
So Cash was up a healthy 50 percent year over year.
That's awesome.
OK.
And our accounts receivable is up less than cash which I always like to see in inventory was up a bunch
as well.
That's been I guess this kind of concern but you know what.
It's such a small number.
I'm not too concerned.
OK.
But if you have too much human toy it's a massive number too much inventory can actually bankrupt a
company.
I'll talk about that later.
Moving on to long term assets.
Looks like our building went down 5 percent year over year and the reason is because remember during
the same exercise our depreciation was $5000.
Right.
So that's why that's why it looks like we bought $10000 more of land here and for the first time we
bought a machine here as well.
OK.
So assets went up 20 percent year over year.
Now let's try and understand why assets went up that much.
So let's look at the liability section first accounts payable mean the money we owed others went up
17 percent year over year.
Our short term debt went down 11 percent year over year.
That's awesome.
I love to see that.
And then our long term debt went down $1000.
Also awesome.
Love to see that.
That's that's great.
And then retained earnings here went up huge.
Wow.
That went up 80 percent year over year.
That's amazing.
Ok cool.
And then common shares.
Looks like we issued shares for an additional $60000 went up 40 percent year over year.
But it looks like the bulk of the increase of the 20 percent for liabilities in equities this section
came from retained earnings.
Right.
And that will tell us basically why this side increased.
Right so here we have cash and equivalents increasing $200000.
Right a lot of that will be explained by this.
But there's something it doesn't make sense to me.
And it won't make sense to us until we see the cash flow statement exercise in the next section which
is this why is retained earnings or net income up 375 thousand dollars.
Right.
Which it was if you go back to our income statement exercise increase that much for that year.
Why is that the case.
And Cash was only up $200000.
Just keep that in mind I want to put that on your radar screen right now.
Don't worry about it we'll cover that once we get to the cash flow statement.
And let's look actually at the income statement to see just to verify that that's right see retained
earnings.
Right.
So it's the earnings that you retained.
It was up 3 or 75000 1750s let me just go over here and drag in my income statement.
That's what I'm talking about.
Here we go.
Yes that's right.
So it looks like net income or profit was 75000 here.
So let me say bye bye to that.
Great.
Okay cool.
So are there any concerns here.
Not really.
I mean I might I might conclude that inventory was a concern but it's not because it's so small.
That is an explanation of the balance sheet